United States Department of the Interior 
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT 
Color Country District 
176 DL Sargent Dr, Cedar City, UT 84721 
https://www.blm.gov 
 
 
August 28, 2026 
 
FIRE PREVENTION ORDER: UT-020-2026-09 
Rescission of Stage 2 Fire Restriction and Reinstates Stage 1 Fire Restrictions 
 
Purpose:  The purpose of this Order is to transition the Color Country District from Stage 2 to Stage 1 
Fire Restrictions. Recent precipitation, increased fuel moisture levels, and moderating fire weather have 
sufficiently reduced the fire hazard to warrant the rescission of Stage 2 restrictions. However, because a 
significant threat to human life, public lands, and natural resources remains, the reinstatement of Stage 1 
Fire Restrictions is necessary to prevent human-caused wildfires and protect the public and the 
environment. 
 
Effective Date:  This order is effective beginning September 01, and shall remain in effect until rescinded 
by the Color Country District Manager.  
 
Authority and Scope:  Pursuant to Department of Interior Title 43 Code of Federal Regulations § 9212.1 
(h), the following acts are prohibited on all Bureau of Land Management administered areas, lands, roads, 
waterways, and trails, within the State of Utah under the jurisdiction of the Color Country District in 
Garfield, Piute, Sanpete, Sevier and Wayne counties.   
 
Prohibited Acts: 
1. Building or maintaining any open fire or campfires using solid fuels, or any ash-producing fuel.  
2. Smoking except within a vehicle or enclosed area.  
3. Grinding, cutting, and welding of metal. 
4. Operating or using any internal combustion engine without a spark arresting device properly 
installed and in effective working order per Title 43 CFR § 8343.1.  
Integration of Prior Orders:  This order incorporates and supplements the prohibited acts set forth in 
Fire Prevention Order Number UT-914-25-001. 
1. The use/discharge of explosives of any kind, incendiary or chemical devices, pyrotechnic devices, 
exploding targets, pressurized containers or canisters, and binary explosives.  
2. The use/discharge of any kind of fireworks as defined by this order. 
Definitions: 
1. Fireworks include, but are not limited to, any device which produces noise, smoke, showers of 
sparks, or movement by combustion or explosive materials. These explosives are defined by the 
U.S. Department of Transportation in 49 CFR 173. This definition includes all classes of 
fireworks. 
2. Binary explosives include, but are not limited to, pre-packaged products consisting of two 

2 
 
separate components, usually an oxidizer like ammonium nitrate and a fuel such as aluminum or 
another metal. These binary explosives are defined by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, 
and Explosives in 27 CFR 555. 
Permissible Acts: 
1. Use of devices fueled by pressurized liquid or gas with a shut-off valve are approved in all 
locations if there is at least three feet in diameter that is barren with no flammable vegetation. 
2. Use of campfires only in permanently constructed cement or metal fire pits located in agency 
developed campgrounds and picnic areas. 
Exemptions: 
1. All exemptions to this prevention order are obtained through local permits issued by the 
authorized officer for activities that will not conflict with the purpose of the order (Title 43 CFR § 
9212.3). 
2. Any federal, state, or local officer or member of an organized rescue or firefighting force in the 
performance of an official duty. 
Criminal Penalties:  Any person in violation of this Fire Prevention Order may be subject to criminal 
prosecution under any applicable law, DOI, or BLM regulation. Under Title 43 U.S. Code § 1733 (a) and 
Title 18 USC § 3559, such violations are classified as Class A Misdemeanors. Pursuant to Title 18 USC § 
3571, a violation that does not result in death is punishable by a fine of not more than $100,000, 
imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
 
Civil Liability and Suppression Costs:  In addition to criminal penalties, any person found responsible 
for a violation of this Fire Prevention Order may be held civilly liable for the total costs of fire 
suppression and any damages to public lands, resources, or improvements resulting from said violation. 
 
Contact:  If you have any questions or concerns regarding this Fire Prevention Order, please contact 
BLM Utah Public Affairs at blm_ut_external_affairs@blm.gov or 801 320 8255. 
 
 
 
 
Signed by: 
 
 
 
Randy Peterson  
Color Country District Manager, Acting 
Bureau of Land Management 
Department of the Interior 