United States Department of the Interior 
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT 
Color Country District  
176 D.L. Sargent Drive 
Cedar City, UT 84721 
https://www.blm.gov 
 
 
September 2, 2026 
 
FIRE PREVENTION ORDER: UT-020-2026-10 
Rescission of Stage 1 Fire Restrictions 
 
Purpose:  Recent and forecasted weather patterns have resulted in diminished wildfire potential, 
significantly reducing the wildfire hazard within the Color Country District and allowing for 
the rescission of Stage 1 Fire Restrictions. Accordingly, Fire Prevention Order UT-020-2026-09 
and UT-020-2026-07 is hereby rescinded. 
  
This rescission applies only to the specific prohibitions outlined in the aforementioned Stage 1 
Order. All year-round fire prevention orders, including the permanent prohibition of fireworks 
and exploding targets on Bureau of Land Management (BLM) administered lands, remains in 
full force and effect. Additionally, this Order does not supersede any other active fire or 
resource-related restrictions currently implemented by the District. 
 
Effective Date:  This order is effective beginning Friday, September 4, at 12:01 a.m.  
 
Authority and Scope:  Pursuant to Department of Interior Title 43 Code of Federal Regulations 
§ 9212.1 (h), this order includes Bureau of Land Management administered areas, lands, roads, 
waterways, and trails, within the State of Utah under the jurisdiction of the Color Country 
District in Washington, Iron, Beaver, Piute, Sevier, Sanpete, Garfield, and Wayne counties.   
 
Year-Rounds Restrictions Still in Effect:  The prohibited acts below are set forth in Fire 
Prevention Order Number UT-914-25-001. 
 
1. The use/discharge of explosives of any kind, incendiary or chemical devices, 
pyrotechnic devices, exploding targets, pressurized containers or canisters, and 
binary explosives.  
 
2. The use/discharge of any kind of fireworks as defined by this order. 
 
Definitions: 
1. Fireworks include, but are not limited to, any device which produces noise, 
smoke, showers of sparks, or movement by combustion or explosive materials. 
These explosives are defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation in 49 
CFR 173. This definition includes all classes of fireworks. 
 
2. Binary explosives include, but are not limited to, pre-packaged products 
consisting of two separate components, usually an oxidizer like ammonium 

2 
 
nitrate and a fuel such as aluminum or another metal. These binary explosives 
are defined by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives in 27 
CFR 555. 
 
Contact:  If you have any questions or concerns regarding this Fire Prevention Order, please 
contact BLM Utah Public Affairs at blm_ut_external_affairs@blm.gov or call: 801-320-8255. 
 
 
 
 
Signed by: 
 
 
 
Randy Peterson 
Color Country District Manager, Acting 
Bureau of Land Management 
Department of the Interior 
 
 