United States Department of the Interior 
BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT 
Utah State Office 
440 West 200 South, Suite 500 
Salt Lake City, UT  84101-1434 
COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, UTAH, WYOMING 
June 17, 2025 
F
IRE PREVENTION ORDER UTAH BLM LANDS 
United States Department the Interior 
Bureau of Land Management 
Order No. UT9l4-25-001 
A
ccording to regulations of the Department of Interior, found at 43 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) 9212.1 (h), the additional following acts are prohibited on Bureau of Land Management 
(BLM) areas, lands, roads, waterways, and trails, in the State of Utah, until rescinded by the Utah 
BLM State Director. 
A
cts prohibited under this order include the following: 
• The use/discharge of explosives of any kind, incendiary or chemical devices,
pyrotechnic devices, exploding targets, pressurized containers or canisters, and binary
explosives.
• The use/discharge of any kind of fireworks as defined by this order.
Definition(s): 
Fireworks include, but are not limited to, any device which produces noise, smoke, showers of 
sparks, or movement by combustion or explosive materials. These explosives are defined by the 
U.S. Department of Transportation in 49 CFR 173. This definition includes all classes of 
fireworks. 
Binary explosives include, but are not limited to, pre-packaged products consisting of two 
separate components, usually an oxidizer like ammonium nitrate and a fuel such as aluminum or 
another metal. These binary explosives are defined by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, 
Firearms, and Explosives in 27 CFR 555. 
Exemptions from the order: 
All exemptions to this prevention order will be handled through local permits issued by BLM 
Districts for said purpose. 
Area description: 
BLM managed lands within the State of Utah. 
This Fire Prevention Order is effective l2:01 a.m., 18th day of June 2025, and will remain in 
effect until rescinded. 
INTERIOR REGION 7 • UPPER COLORADO BASIN 
2 
Anyone in violation of this Fire Prevention Order may be subject to civil liability or criminal 
prosecution under any applicable law or BLM regulation. A violation of this Order may be 
classified as a Class A Misdemeanor Offense under 43 USC 1733(a) FLPMA , 18 USC 3559. 
Pursuant to 18 USC 3571, if the violation does not result in death, anyone who violates this order 
may be fined not more than $100,000 and/or imprisoned for not more than 12 months.  Liability 
for total fire suppression and damage costs incurred will be borne by the responsible party. 
 
This order will supersede and rescind all previous fire prevention orders issued by this office.  
 
Information regarding fire prevention orders and fire restrictions may be obtained at  
blm.gov/programs/fire/regional-info/utah/fire-restrictions.  
 
 
 
 
 
   Gerald Davis 
   State Director, Acting 
 